.. _tutorial/code:

Working with code
=================

**Welcome to the lab.js tutorial, and thank you for checking out our library!**
We hope you like it, and are excited to see how you are going to use it in your
research.

----

On the following pages, we're going to provide an introduction to building
experiments using ``lab.js``, and show you how the library works. In our
experience, it will take between 30 minutes and an hour to get a feel for how to
work with the library, and probably an afternoon to build your first experiment.
After that, our experience is that things get progressively easier, and students
can often build a complete experiment in an hour or two.

The experiments will be built as web pages, so the tutorial presupposes some
familiarity with HTML and CSS, and some (minimal) experience in programming
(not necessarily in Javascript -- R users, in our experience, quickly feel at
home).

If you are not familiar with HTML and CSS, it is well worth it to spend some
time learning these skills, which are handy regardless of how you will build
your experiments, and useful far beyond the domain of online experiments. These
topics warrant their own tutorials; thankfully, `Codecademy
<https://www.codecademy.com/>`_ offers an excellent course on `HTML and CSS
<https://www.codecademy.com/learn/web>`_ that will teach you everything you need
to know for building experiments online and more. If you are just getting
started with making web pages, we warmly recommend this course. Similarly, there
is a very good `introductory Javascript course
<https://www.codecademy.com/learn/javascript>`_ offered on Codecademy and
another on `Khan Academy
<https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-programming/programming>`_.
However, having detailed Javascript knowledge is not necessary for following the
tutorial: If you have a little experience in programming (especially with R), or
if you are willing to experiment and mess with the code, please be invited to
jump right in and consult further resources as required.

With that, let's get started!

.. note::
  We're actively working on the tutorials -- things might be slightly ajar
  still. If you spot something that might be improved, please let us know.

.. toctree::
   :caption: Contents
   :maxdepth: 1

   getting_started.rst
   study.rst
   functional.rst
