
Welcome to the **lab.js** documentation!
========================================

About
-----

.. image:: ci/flask_s.png
    :align: right

**lab.js is a toolkit of components for constructing client-side online
experiments in Javascript.** Its goal is to provide an intuitive and
approachable means of proramming experiments for researchers familiar with
``HTML`` and ``CSS``, but only limited experience with Javascript. At the same
time, it aims to remain flexible and extensible, so as not to restrict advanced
users.

Initially built for experimental psychology, it can be used to construct
experiments throughout the social and behavioral sciences. It is not limited
to any particular paradigm or environment, and designed to handle questionnaires
just as well as complex experimental tasks.

An additional design goal is to provide a tool for :ref:`teaching <teach>`
programming and experimental design to students. In particular, it is intended
to provide a stepping stone for students with knowledge of ``HTML``, but little
programming experience. The structure of the library has been chosen to expose
the features of the underlying Javascript programming language, and to be
extensible using the same.

**Thank you for checking out lab.js!** If you are new around here, you might
want to go through the :ref:`tutorial <tutorial>` to get started. There are also
plenty of :ref:`examples <examples>` if you are searching for code, or looking
to extend an existing experiment. If you are interested in our approach, we have
tried to summarize the :ref:`philosophy <philosophy>` we came up with post-hoc
to justify why we did this in the first place. Of course, you are more than
welcome to :ref:`contribute <contribute>` if you see room for improvement --
help and suggestions are very much appreciated!

Contributors
------------

* Felix Henninger Â· http://felixhenninger.com

A `full list of contributors`_ is provided in the repository.

.. _full list of contributors: https://github.com/FelixHenninger/lab.js#contributors

.. toctree::
   :caption: Learn
   :hidden:

   learn/builder/index.rst
   learn/code/index.rst
   learn/style.rst
   learn/data.rst
   learn/examples/index.rst

.. toctree::
   :caption: Use
   :hidden:

   reference/index.rst
   genindex.rst

.. toctree::
   :caption: Meta
   :hidden:

   meta/contribute.rst
   meta/teach.rst
   meta/roadmap.rst
   meta/philosophy.rst
